doc/notes/714_ipc.ant.md, before:

---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---

# C/C++ Intercomponent Communication
### xtUML Project Analysis Note


1. Abstract
-----------
The ability to communicate using inter-process communication is being added
to the C model compiler.

2. Document References
----------------------
[1] [nesting #714](https://support.onefact.net/redmine/issues/714)  

3. Background
-------------
The C model compiler presently transmits messages and signals between
components using a simple call/return protocol where the generated message
function in the outbound port of the sending component calls the
corresponding message function on the inbound port of the receiving
component.  This works nicely.

The AUTOSAR MC supports a different flavor of messaging.  The SystemC MC
supports another flavor of messaging.  We want the vanilla C model
compiler to support messaging where "messaging" roughly implies
marshalling parameter data into a structure, sending the structure through
a channel and then extracting the parameters from the stucture at the
receiving component end.

Socket communication is the first mechanism to be considered.  We have
experience using sockets to communicate with user interfaces (as in the 
GPS Watch example).

4. Requirements
---------------
4.1 Asynchronous Signals  
xtUML signal messages shall be supported with zero to many parameters
of all the types supported by BridgePoint.

4.2 Synchronous Operations  
xtUML synchronous operation messages shall be supported with zero to many
parameters of all the types supported by BridgePoint.

4.2.1 Synchronous Operation Return Values  
The return value of a synchronous operation shall be supported.

4.3 IPC - Interprocess Communication  
Communication between components will be supported when components are
running in different operating system processes (tasks) with different
(or same) address spaces.

4.4 Networking  
TCP/IP networking shall be supported.  Communication between components
deployed on different machines sharing a network shall be configurable.

4.5 Communication Optimization  
When the sending and receiving component pair exist in the same process,
communication may be optimized to the simpler call/return protocol.

5. Analysis
-----------
Consider adding TE_I.

5.1  ISR Code  
There is code that generates interrupt service routines 

5.2 Vista Code  
There is Vista code in arc/c!

5.3 Marshalling  

5.4 Synchronous Messages with Return Values  
IPC messaging does not provide return values.  This implies that xtUML
synchronous operation with return values will decompose into two messages
at the architecture level.

5.5 Sockets  
Network sockets provide the required underlying architecture needed to
fulfill the requirements stated above.

5.5.1 File Descriptors  
Socket servers and clients differ in the way file descriptors are obtained.
A socket server will create a socket, but then a useful socket file descriptor
is created only when a client connects (through `accept()` on the server end).
The server must accumulate these connected file descriptors and keep them
correlated with the correct ports/messages.  The client gets a useful file
descriptor upon a successful `connect()`.

5.5.1 Provided Port Reference is Socket Server  
5.5.2 Required Port Reference is Socket Client  

5.6 IP addresses  
5.7 TCP Port Numbers  

5.8 Mappings  
5.8.1 component  
5.8.1 component reference  
5.8.1 port  
5.8.1 message  
5.8.1 parameter  
5.8.1 message return value  

xtUML                | C                                       | naming
---------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------
interface            | interface declaration file              | C_I.Name + .h
interface reference  | inclusion of interface file into comp   | #include "C_I.Name + .h"
message              | C struct in interface declaration file  | typedef struct { int mnum; ... } iface_message_t;
                     | message enumerator (number)             | enum { iface_msg_num; ...; iface_msgmax; } iface_msg_enum;
                     | implementation functions (out and in)   | component_port_message
                     | message number                          | something stable, perhaps alphabetical index within interface
                     | base message type                       | xtUML_message_t
parameter            | C struct member in interface file       | ... { parmtype parm; } ...
parameter type       | C struct member type                    | ... { parmtype parm; } ...
message return value |                                         |
component            | implementation of messages              | vanilla C
                     | IP address                              |
                     | TCP port number                         |
                     | client file descriptor                  |
                     | server file descriptor                  |
                     | connection file descriptor              |
                     | vector table                            | Use msgnum to index into list of pointers to message functions.
                     |                                         | component_port[ msgmax ] = { &comp_port_msg, ... };
                     | message handler                         | Make union of all message types [maybe not needed].
component reference  |                                         |
satisfaction         |                                         |
port                 |                                         |
port reference       |                                         |
provided port ref    | socket server                           |
required port ref    | socket client                           |
send                 | call to outbound port message           | vanilla C

6. Work Required
----------------
6.1 Message Parameter Types  
Structure types will need to be generated that declare containers for the
message parameters.  These types should be generated into an interface
declaration similar to the way OO languages work.  
6.1.1 Generate Interface Declaration File  
For each interface, generate a file of the shape $r{C_I.Name}.h  
6.1.2 Generate Message Enumeration  
In the interface declaration file, generate an enumeration to give a message
number for each message in the interface.  
6.1.3 Generate Structured Types  
In the interface declaration file, generate a `struct` for each message with
one member for each parameter that the message takes.  

6.2  Marshalling  
Code needs to be generated that packs parameters into structures before
sending messages and unpacks messages from structures upon receipt.

6.5.1 Provided Port Reference is Socket Server  
6.5.1.1 `socket()`  
6.5.1.1 `bind()`  
6.5.1.1 `listen()`  
6.5.1.1 `accept()`  
6.5.2 Required Port Reference is Socket Client  
6.5.2.1 `socket()`  
6.5.2.1 `connect()`  
6.5.2.1 `send()`  
6.5.2.1 `recv()`  

6.9 Add Marking  
6.9.1 Structured Messaging  
Add `MarkStructuredMessaging()` function.  Add attribute to `TE_SYSTAG` and `TE_SYS`.

6.9.2 Network Sockets  
Add `MarkNetworkSockets()` function.  Add attribute to `TE_SYSTAG` and `TE_SYS`.

7. Acceptance Test
------------------

End
---





In the interface, generate the types for the message parameter structures.
  - Add a "message_number".
  - Make the message number derivable somehow from the interface alone.  Try to avoid having it change when other stuff changes.
  - port number + message number?

Generate marshalling.
  - In outgoing messages, pack the structure and call ??

Commit message:

job:  #714  This change set provides a prototype implementation of structured messaging (no IPC, yet).  Structured types for message parameters are provided.  The marshalling (packing/unpacking) of parameter data in and out of these structures is demonstrated.  A vector table (per port) is in place.  This work informs the analysis note and allowed exploration.  Refactoring into templates would be needed to make this production quality.

doc/notes/714_ipc.ant.md, after:

---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---

# C/C++ Intercomponent Communication
### xtUML Project Analysis Note


1. Abstract
-----------
The ability to communicate using inter-process communication is being added
to the C model compiler.

2. Document References
----------------------
[1] [nesting #714](https://support.onefact.net/redmine/issues/714)  

3. Background
-------------
The C model compiler presently transmits messages and signals between
components using a simple call/return protocol where the generated message
function in the outbound port of the sending component calls the
corresponding message function on the inbound port of the receiving
component.  This works nicely.

The AUTOSAR MC supports a different flavor of messaging.  The SystemC MC
supports another flavor of messaging.  We want the vanilla C model
compiler to support messaging where "messaging" roughly implies
marshalling parameter data into a structure, sending the structure through
a channel and then extracting the parameters from the stucture at the
receiving component end.

Socket communication is the first mechanism to be considered.  We have
experience using sockets to communicate with user interfaces (as in the 
GPS Watch example).

4. Requirements
---------------
4.1 Asynchronous Signals  
xtUML signal messages shall be supported with zero to many parameters
of all the types supported by BridgePoint.

4.2 Synchronous Operations  
xtUML synchronous operation messages shall be supported with zero to many
parameters of all the types supported by BridgePoint.

4.2.1 Synchronous Operation Return Values  
The return value of a synchronous operation shall be supported.

4.3 IPC - Interprocess Communication  
Communication between components will be supported when components are
running in different operating system processes (tasks) with different
(or same) address spaces.

4.4 Networking  
TCP/IP networking shall be supported.  Communication between components
deployed on different machines sharing a network shall be configurable.

4.5 Communication Optimization  
When the sending and receiving component pair exist in the same process,
communication may be optimized to the simpler call/return protocol.

5. Analysis
-----------
t.smt.c is still used!  _iop.  Maybe get rid of it... there are some things being used around events.
Consider adding TE_I.
Opportunities for options include:
- network server and client mappings (to components, references, ports)  
- message identification and routing (using component, reference, port,
message information)  
Vectoring Options
- Should all messages be declared with vanilla parameter?
- Should messages having no parameters be declared with vanilla parameter?
- Where does the casting occur?
I think the vectoring needs to be consistent.  So, the elements in the vector table must be of all the same type.  Thus, every message must be declared with the vanilla "pointer to base_msg_t" parameter.

Hmmm, I think maybe the m-> method of incoming parameter reference is not solid.  We need to copy the parameters into scope.  Otherwise, we they may be laying in a rotating buffer that gets reused/overwritten.  Hmm, maybe not.  ...proceding for the time being to evaluate this later.

Consider a refactor of the message templates.

5.1  ISR Code  
There is code that generates interrupt service routines 

5.2 Vista Code  
There is Vista code in arc/c!

5.3 Marshalling  

5.4 Synchronous Messages with Return Values  
IPC messaging does not provide return values.  This implies that xtUML
synchronous operation with return values will decompose into two messages
at the architecture level.

5.5 Sockets  
Network sockets provide the required underlying architecture needed to
fulfill the requirements stated above.

5.5.1 File Descriptors  
Socket servers and clients differ in the way file descriptors are obtained.
A socket server will create a socket, but then a useful socket file descriptor
is created only when a client connects (through `accept()` on the server end).
The server must accumulate these connected file descriptors and keep them
correlated with the correct ports/messages.  The client gets a useful file
descriptor upon a successful `connect()`.

5.5.1 Provided Port Reference is Socket Server  
5.5.2 Required Port Reference is Socket Client  

5.6 IP addresses  
5.7 TCP Port Numbers  

5.8 Mappings  
5.8.1 component  
5.8.1 component reference  
5.8.1 port  
5.8.1 message  
5.8.1 parameter  
5.8.1 message return value  

xtUML                | C                                       | naming
---------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------
interface            | interface declaration file              | C_I.Name + .h
interface reference  | inclusion of interface file into comp   | #include "C_I.Name + .h"
message              | C struct in interface declaration file  | typedef struct { Escher_mid_t mid; ... } iface_message_t;
                     | message enumerator (number)             | enum { iface_msg_num; ...; iface_msgmax; } iface_msg_enum;
                     | implementation functions (out and in)   | component_port_message
                     | message number                          | something stable, perhaps alphabetical index within interface
                     | base message type                       | xtUML_message_t
parameter            | C struct member in interface file       | ... { parmtype parm; } ...
parameter type       | C struct member type                    | ... { parmtype parm; } ...
message return value |                                         |
component            | implementation of messages              | vanilla C
                     | IP address                              |
                     | TCP port number                         |
                     | client file descriptor                  |
                     | server file descriptor                  |
                     | connection file descriptor              |
                     | vector table                            | Use msgnum to index into list of pointers to message functions.
                     |                                         | component_port[ msgmax ] = { &comp_port_msg, ... };
                     | message handler                         | Make union of all message types [maybe not needed].
component reference  |                                         |
satisfaction         |                                         |
port                 |                                         |
port reference       |                                         |
provided port ref    | socket server                           |
required port ref    | socket client                           |
send                 | call to outbound port message           | vanilla C

6. Work Required
----------------
6.1 Message Parameter Types  
Structure types will need to be generated that declare containers for the
message parameters.  These types should be generated into an interface
declaration similar to the way object oriented languages work.  
6.1.1 Generate Interface Declaration File  
For each interface, generate a file of the shape $r{C_I.Name}.h  
6.1.2 Generate Message Enumeration  
In the interface declaration file, generate an enumeration to give a message
identifier (ID) for each message in the interface.  Use a structured type
for the message identifier so that it can flexibly accommodate different forms
of message identification such as inclusion of identifying information for
component references, interfaces and ports.  
6.1.3 Generate Structured Types  
In the interface declaration file, generate a `struct` for each message with
the first member being the message identifier.  Following the message ID,
one member for each parameter that the message takes, if any.  

6.2  Marshalling  
Code needs to be generated that packs parameters into structures before
sending messages.  Code needs to be generated that unpacks messages from
structures upon receipt.

6.5.1 Provided Port Reference is Socket Server  
6.5.1.1 `socket()`  
6.5.1.1 `bind()`  
6.5.1.1 `listen()`  
6.5.1.1 `accept()`  
6.5.2 Required Port Reference is Socket Client  
6.5.2.1 `socket()`  
6.5.2.1 `connect()`  
6.5.2.1 `send()`  
6.5.2.1 `recv()`  

6.9 Add Marking  
6.9.1 Structured Messaging  
Add `MarkStructuredMessaging()` function.  Add attribute to `TE_SYSTAG` and `TE_SYS`.

6.9.2 Network Sockets  
Add `MarkNetworkSockets()` function.  Add attribute to `TE_SYSTAG` and `TE_SYS`.

7. Acceptance Test
------------------

End
---





In the interface, generate the types for the message parameter structures.
  - Add a "message_number".
  - Make the message number derivable somehow from the interface alone.  Try to avoid having it change when other stuff changes.
  - port number + message number?

Generate marshalling.
  - In outgoing messages, pack the structure and call ??
