doc/notes/9893_xtuml2masl_int.adoc, before:

= xtuml2masl without Eclipse

xtUML Project Implementation Note

== 1 Abstract

This note provides implementation documentation for an improvement to the
`xtuml2masl` command line utility of BridgePoint.

== 2 Introduction and Background

See <<dr-1>>.

This implementation involved making several practical decisions.  The path
to integrating the functionality was pretty wide.  Choices made are
documented here.

== 3 Requirements

See <<dr-2>>.

== 4 Work Required

=== 4.1 MASL Output
The same MASL formatting remains in place.  The `masl` back end runs just
as it did previously, so the MASL output is not affected by this work.

=== 4.2 No Eclipse Workbench
To avoid running the Eclipse workbench, prebuilder is not invoked.  The
file system is traversed directly to accumulate the structural and activity
xtUML information.

=== 4.3 Structural xtUML Loading
The MC-3020 model compiler xtUML loader is enhanced to recursively navigate
down through a file system directory hierarchy reading all '.xtuml' files.
In the xtUML loader, the code that reads a single file is re-factored to be
callable multiple times to read as many files as necessary.  `ftw` <<dr-3>>
is used to find the files to be loaded.

==== 4.3.1 File Tree Walker
See <<dr-3>> to learn about `ftw`, _file tree walk_.  This C library function
takes as input a file system directory path and a callback function.  ftw then
recursively navigates downward through the directory structure invoking the
callback function on each file and directory encountered.

In the xtUML loader implementation, the callback function checks the name of
the given file against a pattern ('.xtuml').  When a match is encountered,
the file is read, and the SQL statements interpreted, and instances loaded.

NOTE:  A simplistic and straight-forward `strstr` implementation is provided
for this pattern match.  It has the weakness of potentially matching the
pattern in the middle of a file or path name.  During review this was
discussed and deemed good enough.

The model path required for traversal is derived from the (-i) 'projectroot'
parameter required by `xtuml2masl`.  '/models' is appended to 'projectroot'
and used as the top level folder for model source both structural xtUML and
MASL activities.

=== 4.4 MASL Activity Loading
The MC-3020 xtUML loader is enhanced to recursively navigate down through
a file system directory hierarchy reading all '.masl' files.  The same
file tree walk (`ftw`) utility as used for structural xtUML is used for
the MASL activity files.  However, a different parser is used to load them.

==== 4.4.1 MASL Activity Container Parsing
The MASL activity code blocks are parsed out and stored in the
'Action_Semantics_internal' fields of S_SYNC, SM_ACT, O_TFR and the SPR_*
action bodies.  A new parser is implemented in C after the fashion of the
existing SQL parser used to parse .xtuml files.  This parser knows (only)
about activity containers and does not parse the action language.  The
grammar for the parser is as follows:

----
   MASL Activity Container Parser Grammar

   activity_file:  ( activity_container )*
   activity_container:
     activity_begin ( uuid )+ do_not_edit
     signature
     code_block
     activity_end do_not_edit
----

An example '.masl' activity file is shown in <<dr-2>>.

The uuids are used as keys to select action homes (SM_ACT et al) from the
loaded population of structural xtUML.  Once the correct action home is
selected, the string attribute which holds the action body (code block) is
written to 'Action_Semantics_internal'.  This select and update is implemented
as OAL in the 'maslin' model in a domain function named
'load_activity_code_block'.

== 5 Implementation Comments

=== 5.1 Unrecognized SQL INSERTs
Previously, the xtUML load code in MC-3020 would abort if an unrecognized
SQL INSERT were encountered.  Recently, this abort was removed in favor of
a warning.  The warning is not useful either, and so now the warning is
removed.  This allows valid unrecognized statements such as INSERTs of
elements from the OOA of Graphics.  Such elements will be common in data
scooped directly from the file system.

=== 5.2 Support for Real in xtUML Loader
Previously, the xtUML load code in MC-3020 had no support for real numbers.
Since elements from the OOA of Graphics carry real-typed fields, support for
Real is added.  This was a one-line change to allow a decimal point within a
number.

=== 5.3 Relaxed Option Parsing
`getopt` is used to parse command line options passed to `xtuml2masl`,
`x2m` and `masl`.  Previously, unrecognized command line options were
treated as a fatal error, and the application would exit.  This is relaxed
to allow unrecognized options and simply "pass them through".  This is
convenient during development when adding new options.

== 6 Unit Test
[This section is copied and modified from <<dr-2>>.

Testing on Windows will be performed and result documented.  Windows is not
required for this work, but similar functionality will be required on Windows
by other users in the future.

=== 6.1 GPS Watch Build
Run a build from within the BridgePoint GUI to ensure changes have not
compromised the existing flow.

. Run BridgePoint.
. Create a new workspace.
. Import the GPS Watch (MASL) example project.
. Build it.
. *results:* See a clean build.

=== 6.2 GPS Watch Deployment Test
After running the GPS Watch in the GUI, run a command line to test that
Deployments are supported with the new work.

. Starting from where <<8.1 GPS Watch Build>> finished, exit BridgePoint.
. In a bash shell, navigate to the workspace folder where GPS Watch was created.
. Invoke <install>/BridgePoint/tools/mc/bin/xtuml2masl -p GPS_Watch -o /tmp/GPSDeployment
. *results:* See correct MASL in /tmp/GPSDeployment.
. *results:* Note that Eclipse was never invoked.

=== 6.3 'calculator' Command Line
Run the new command line `xtuml2masl` and see it run successfully without
using Eclipse or a workspace.

. In a bash shell on Linux, navigate to (xtuml/)git/models/masl/calculator.
. Invoke <install>/BridgePoint/tools/mc/bin/xtuml2masl -d ALU -o /tmp/ALU
. *results:* See correct MASL in /tmp/ALU.
. *results:* Note that Eclipse was never invoked.

=== 6.4 Server MASL Round Trip
Run MASL Round Trip on a build server and see a clean report.

== 7 User Documentation

=== 7.1 `xtuml2masl` man page
The man page is updated to not prescribe a WORKSPACE environment variable.
It is no longer needed.

== 8 Code Changes

- fork/repository:  cortlandstarrett/bridgepoint
- branch:  9893_xtuml2masl

----
 src/org.xtuml.bp.doc/Reference/MASL/xtuml2masl/xtuml2masl.html |  1 -
 src/org.xtuml.bp.doc/Reference/MASL/xtuml2masl/xtuml2masl.md   |  1 -
 src/org.xtuml.bp.x2m/src/org/xtuml/bp/x2m/Xtuml2Masl.java      | 21 ---------------------
 3 files changed, 23 deletions(-)
----

- fork/repository:  cortlandstarrett/mc
- branch:  9893_xtuml2masl

----
 arc/c/sys.arc                                            |   4 +
 arc/t.sys_maslload.c                                     | 187 +++++++++++++++++++++
 arc/t.sys_xtumlload.c                                    |  88 ++++++----
 arc/t.sys_xtumlload.h                                    |   3 +-
 bin/masl_round_trip                                      |   2 +-
 bin/xtuml2masl                                           |  62 +++++++
 doc/notes/9893_xtuml2masl_dnt.adoc                       | 298 +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
 doc/notes/9893_xtuml2masl_int.adoc                       | 203 +++++++++++++++++++++++
 doc/review-minutes/9893_xtuml2masl_int_rvm.adoc          |  36 ++++
 doc/review-minutes/9893_xtuml2masl_rvm.adoc              |  34 ++++
 mcmc/arlan/rsl2oal.l                                     |   1 +
 mcmc/arlan/rsl2oal.y                                     |   1 +
 model/maslout/gen/STRING_bridge.c                        |  23 ++-
 model/maslout/gen/STRING_bridge.h                        |   1 +
 model/maslout/gen/sys_user_co.c                          |  22 ++-
 model/maslout/gen/sys_xtumlload.c                        | 584 ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
 model/mcooa/gen/readme.txt                               |   3 +-
 model/mcshared/models/mcshared/functions/functions.xtuml | 109 ++++++++++++
 18 files changed, 1603 insertions(+), 58 deletions(-)
----

== 9 Document References

1. [[dr-1]] https://support.onefact.net/issues/9893[9893 - xtuml2masl without eclipse]
2. [[dr-2]] link:9893_xtuml2masl_dnt.adoc[Design Note -  xtuml2masl without eclipse]
3. [[dr-3]] http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/ftw.3.html[FTW - Linux Man Page for _file tree walk_]

---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---

Commit message:

job:  #9893  Added note that model upgrade code is bypassed.  Added terminator service codeblock load.

doc/notes/9893_xtuml2masl_int.adoc, after:

= xtuml2masl without Eclipse

xtUML Project Implementation Note

== 1 Abstract

This note provides implementation documentation for an improvement to the
`xtuml2masl` command line utility of BridgePoint.

== 2 Introduction and Background

See <<dr-1>>.

This implementation involved making several practical decisions.  The path
to integrating the functionality was pretty wide.  Choices made are
documented here.

== 3 Requirements

See <<dr-2>>.

== 4 Work Required

=== 4.1 MASL Output
The same MASL formatting remains in place.  The `masl` back end runs just
as it did previously, so the MASL output is not affected by this work.

=== 4.2 No Eclipse Workbench
To avoid running the Eclipse workbench, prebuilder is not invoked.  The
file system is traversed directly to accumulate the structural and activity
xtUML information.

=== 4.3 Structural xtUML Loading
The MC-3020 model compiler xtUML loader is enhanced to recursively navigate
down through a file system directory hierarchy reading all '.xtuml' files.
In the xtUML loader, the code that reads a single file is re-factored to be
callable multiple times to read as many files as necessary.  `ftw` <<dr-3>>
is used to find the files to be loaded.

==== 4.3.1 File Tree Walker
See <<dr-3>> to learn about `ftw`, _file tree walk_.  This C library function
takes as input a file system directory path and a callback function.  ftw then
recursively navigates downward through the directory structure invoking the
callback function on each file and directory encountered.

In the xtUML loader implementation, the callback function checks the name of
the given file against a pattern ('.xtuml').  When a match is encountered,
the file is read, and the SQL statements interpreted, and instances loaded.

NOTE:  A simplistic and straight-forward `strstr` implementation is provided
for this pattern match.  It has the weakness of potentially matching the
pattern in the middle of a file or path name.  During review this was
discussed and deemed good enough.

The model path required for traversal is derived from the (-i) 'projectroot'
parameter required by `xtuml2masl`.  '/models' is appended to 'projectroot'
and used as the top level folder for model source both structural xtUML and
MASL activities.

=== 4.4 MASL Activity Loading
The MC-3020 xtUML loader is enhanced to recursively navigate down through
a file system directory hierarchy reading all '.masl' files.  The same
file tree walk (`ftw`) utility as used for structural xtUML is used for
the MASL activity files.  However, a different parser is used to load them.

==== 4.4.1 MASL Activity Container Parsing
The MASL activity code blocks are parsed out and stored in the
'Action_Semantics_internal' fields of S_SYNC, SM_ACT, O_TFR and the SPR_*
action bodies.  A new parser is implemented in C after the fashion of the
existing SQL parser used to parse .xtuml files.  This parser knows (only)
about activity containers and does not parse the action language.  The
grammar for the parser is as follows:

----
   MASL Activity Container Parser Grammar

   activity_file:  ( activity_container )*
   activity_container:
     activity_begin ( uuid )+ do_not_edit
     signature
     code_block
     activity_end do_not_edit
----

An example '.masl' activity file is shown in <<dr-2>>.

The uuids are used as keys to select action homes (SM_ACT et al) from the
loaded population of structural xtUML.  Once the correct action home is
selected, the string attribute which holds the action body (code block) is
written to 'Action_Semantics_internal'.  This select and update is implemented
as OAL in the 'maslin' model in a domain function named
'load_activity_code_block'.

== 5 Implementation Comments

=== 5.1 Unrecognized SQL INSERTs
Previously, the xtUML load code in MC-3020 would abort if an unrecognized
SQL INSERT were encountered.  Recently, this abort was removed in favor of
a warning.  The warning is not useful either, and so now the warning is
removed.  This allows valid unrecognized statements such as INSERTs of
elements from the OOA of Graphics.  Such elements will be common in data
scooped directly from the file system.

=== 5.2 Support for Real in xtUML Loader
Previously, the xtUML load code in MC-3020 had no support for real numbers.
Since elements from the OOA of Graphics carry real-typed fields, support for
Real is added.  This was a one-line change to allow a decimal point within a
number.

=== 5.3 Relaxed Option Parsing
`getopt` is used to parse command line options passed to `xtuml2masl`,
`x2m` and `masl`.  Previously, unrecognized command line options were
treated as a fatal error, and the application would exit.  This is relaxed
to allow unrecognized options and simply "pass them through".  This is
convenient during development when adding new options.

=== 5.4 Model Data Upgrade
It is noted that scooping data directly from the file system bypasses model
upgrade code contained in the xtUML loader in BridgePoint proper.  Now that
we are not running the prebuilder, this upgrade will not take place.  This
should be a problem only on stale model data that has aged several versions.

== 6 Unit Test
[This section is copied and modified from <<dr-2>>.

Testing on Windows will be performed and result documented.  Windows is not
required for this work, but similar functionality will be required on Windows
by other users in the future.

=== 6.1 GPS Watch Build
Run a build from within the BridgePoint GUI to ensure changes have not
compromised the existing flow.

. Run BridgePoint.
. Create a new workspace.
. Import the GPS Watch (MASL) example project.
. Build it.
. *results:* See a clean build.

=== 6.2 GPS Watch Deployment Test
After running the GPS Watch in the GUI, run a command line to test that
Deployments are supported with the new work.

. Starting from where <<8.1 GPS Watch Build>> finished, exit BridgePoint.
. In a bash shell, navigate to the workspace folder where GPS Watch was created.
. Invoke <install>/BridgePoint/tools/mc/bin/xtuml2masl -p GPS_Watch -o /tmp/GPSDeployment
. *results:* See correct MASL in /tmp/GPSDeployment.
. *results:* Note that Eclipse was never invoked.

=== 6.3 'calculator' Command Line
Run the new command line `xtuml2masl` and see it run successfully without
using Eclipse or a workspace.

. In a bash shell on Linux, navigate to (xtuml/)git/models/masl/calculator.
. Invoke <install>/BridgePoint/tools/mc/bin/xtuml2masl -d ALU -o /tmp/ALU
. *results:* See correct MASL in /tmp/ALU.
. *results:* Note that Eclipse was never invoked.

=== 6.4 Server MASL Round Trip
Run MASL Round Trip on a build server and see a clean report.

== 7 User Documentation

=== 7.1 `xtuml2masl` man page
The man page is updated to not prescribe a WORKSPACE environment variable.
It is no longer needed.

== 8 Code Changes

- fork/repository:  cortlandstarrett/bridgepoint
- branch:  9893_xtuml2masl

----
 src/org.xtuml.bp.doc/Reference/MASL/xtuml2masl/xtuml2masl.html |  1 -
 src/org.xtuml.bp.doc/Reference/MASL/xtuml2masl/xtuml2masl.md   |  1 -
 src/org.xtuml.bp.x2m/src/org/xtuml/bp/x2m/Xtuml2Masl.java      | 21 ---------------------
 3 files changed, 23 deletions(-)
----

- fork/repository:  cortlandstarrett/mc
- branch:  9893_xtuml2masl

----
 arc/c/sys.arc                                            |   4 +
 arc/t.sys_maslload.c                                     | 187 +++++++++++++++++++++
 arc/t.sys_xtumlload.c                                    |  88 ++++++----
 arc/t.sys_xtumlload.h                                    |   3 +-
 bin/masl_round_trip                                      |   2 +-
 bin/xtuml2masl                                           |  62 +++++++
 doc/notes/9893_xtuml2masl_dnt.adoc                       | 298 +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
 doc/notes/9893_xtuml2masl_int.adoc                       | 203 +++++++++++++++++++++++
 doc/review-minutes/9893_xtuml2masl_int_rvm.adoc          |  36 ++++
 doc/review-minutes/9893_xtuml2masl_rvm.adoc              |  34 ++++
 mcmc/arlan/rsl2oal.l                                     |   1 +
 mcmc/arlan/rsl2oal.y                                     |   1 +
 model/maslout/gen/STRING_bridge.c                        |  23 ++-
 model/maslout/gen/STRING_bridge.h                        |   1 +
 model/maslout/gen/sys_user_co.c                          |  22 ++-
 model/maslout/gen/sys_xtumlload.c                        | 584 ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
 model/mcooa/gen/readme.txt                               |   3 +-
 model/mcshared/models/mcshared/functions/functions.xtuml | 109 ++++++++++++
 18 files changed, 1603 insertions(+), 58 deletions(-)
----

== 9 Document References

1. [[dr-1]] https://support.onefact.net/issues/9893[9893 - xtuml2masl without eclipse]
2. [[dr-2]] link:9893_xtuml2masl_dnt.adoc[Design Note -  xtuml2masl without eclipse]
3. [[dr-3]] http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/ftw.3.html[FTW - Linux Man Page for _file tree walk_]

---

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 License

---
